[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And today, we're going to
talk about our relationship
with money.
Is it a love-hate relationship?
Is it a get together
and then break up
really fast relationship?
Does it rule your life?
Well, the average household
consumer debt is $15,000.
And the solution
is really changing
how we relate with money.
It's not just spending
less, but whatever
your personal relationship
is with money.
And entrepreneur,
Kate Northrup, is
joining me to talk
about just that,
our relationship with money.
And her book is called
"Money: A Love Story."
How do you relate money and
love to the same sentence?
>>KATE NORTHRUP: Well-- I know.
>>LISA: That's creative.
>>NORTHRUP: I know.
Well, money is really a
standard for what we value.
It's a system that we
made up as human beings.
And money doesn't really exist.
We literally made it up.
I mean, in the United
States, it is completely not
based on anything anymore,
because we got rid
of the gold standard
in the '70s.
>>LISA: It's paper,
it's numbers.
>>NORTHRUP: It's just bleh.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: So
it's just a system
that we exchange
value for value.
And what we value is
really inextricably linked
with our emotions and with
what's important to us,
because it's different
for everybody.
And one of the ways that we
can improve our relationship
with our money is to
improve our relationship
with ourselves and
our self value.
Because when we
value ourselves we
not only put more value
out into the world,
we also take better care of
the money we already have.
And so it's really about
loving ourselves first,
and then from that place
emanating out and creating
the prosperity and the abundance
and the service in the world
that we'd like to create.
>>LISA: So was it always
like that for you?
Did you start off-- no, no.
You were in debt.
>>NORTHRUP: I was in debt, yeah.
I was in more than the average
consumer household debt.
I was in $20,000 worth
of debt, credit cards.
And I was really--
>>LISA: That's easy
to do, by the way.
>>NORTHRUP: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: You get
out of college, you
don't have an income,
things cost money,
they give you a credit
card, and there it is.
>>NORTHRUP: And there it is.
And my parents had
always told me don't ever
carry a balance on
your credit card.
And I will never
forget the first month
I didn't pay my balance.
And I was like, well it's OK.
Just next month I will, right.
And then next month
turned into next month
turned into several years later.
And there it was at 20,000.
And I've since told
this story and found out
that 20,000 isn't
actually that high.
But as a 22-year-old,
20,000 was a lot.
>>LISA: Well, I mean,
look at the country.
America has trillions
of dollars of debt.
So what are we, mirroring?
I mean--
>>NORTHRUP: It's like
a cultural standard.
And that's a really
great question, actually.
I mean, my work is really
about how we feel about money
and using money as a tool
to create the lives that
are really in alignment
authentically with our values.
And my friend Danielle
LaPorte is a fantastic author.
And she once said, "Debt
is neither good nor bad.
It's just how we feel about it."
And I was like, really.
Because there is an
assumption that debt is bad.
But there are times--
and I have to say
as an entrepreneur-- there
are times that I've invested
in things that I did
not have the cash
flow for in that moment,
but I needed the capital
as an investment in
my business and was
able to make more as a
result of that investment.
So I think that debt has
to do with-- whether it's
good or bad-- has to do with
the consciousness with which we
are taking on the debt.
So sometimes you need to buy a
house and you have a mortgage,
and that's an investment.
Versus I'm going to
go buy these Jimmy
Choos, some pair of shoes.
And it's like,
that's not actually
an investment towards anything.
And that's not really making
the world a better place.
I mean, I have no problem
with shoes, but still.
It's versus taking that
investment toward something
that's going to
further your education
or further your growth.
>>LISA: Right, or help
others and even go beyond.
So you said you're
an entrepreneur.
And what types of companies
did you start, and how
did you decide to do
that rather than take
on a regular job or an employee
relationship type of job?
>>NORTHRUP: So, I mean, I
started my first business
when I was seven with my sister.
I mean, I wouldn't
call it a company.
>>LISA: Right,
right, right, right.
>>NORTHRUP: It was called
Queen Anne's Lace and Katiedids
because my sister's name
is Anne and I'm Kate.
And we sold jewelry and
wild flowers and lemonade.
>>LISA: You sold wild flowers?
>>NORTHRUP: We did.
Yup.
That people could have picked
right there behind our stand
for free.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>NORTHRUP: But
they bought them.
And then I went on to have
dog walking and house sitting
and babysitting and all of that.
But my first kind of real
business was when I was 18,
I started working with
a network marketing
company in direct sales,
because I had this dream
that I wanted to create
financial freedom so that I
could stay at home
with my kids someday.
>>LISA: Wow, that's
a whole nother show.
But network marketing is
that whole idea of you've
got the dream of the
boat and the yacht,
and then you've got
to sell this thing.
And yeah, but you did it.
You're one of those people
that crossed it and did it.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, I mean, the
thing is it's a simple system.
But it was not straightforward.
Like it was not, oh,
I have this dream
and then I'm just going
to go do it and ta-da.
>>LISA: Oh, if it
was simple everybody
would be on the yacht.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, totally.
There's so much that comes up.
And how the book kind of
transpired in my curriculum
was that I was
working with women
starting these businesses.
And I was noticing that
one of the main things that
held them back was their
beliefs about money.
And so they knew
the actions to take.
They knew they needed to get
out there and meet people and do
things, but they
weren't doing them.
And so it was like-- it's
just the same thing as dieting
or being healthy.
We know we need to eat greens.
We know we need to exercise.
But what's the disconnect there?
Why are we not doing the thing?
>>LISA: Why are we not doing it?
Absolutely.
>>NORTHRUP: So I kind
of did a little digging.
And I was like,
what's up with that?
And I noticed it in
my own life, too.
So I knew that there was
something juicy, some gold
here, around our
mindset and how we
feel about money that really
is what creates our reality.
It's not how good we
are with spreadsheets
or what savings
plan we're doing.
All that stuff is
nice, but it's sort
of accessories on top of
really solid money mindset.
>>LISA: So if you're
in an hourly job
in an hourly
position, but yet you
want to really double
or triple your income,
you can't figure out how to do
with the hourly position you're
in.
You have to change
your mindset in order
to actually get to that state.
Is that what you're saying?
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely, yeah.
>>LISA: How?
What mindset do
you need to change?
And what relationship?
Tell me, tell me.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
So first of all,
it has to do with,
like I said at the
beginning, valuing yourself.
So I noticed that when I began
to see the ways that I was
able to add value in
the world and I actually
began to take myself seriously
and take my thoughts seriously
and my opinions and my
own voice seriously,
my income increased
dramatically.
>>LISA: Give me an example.
>>NORTHRUP: So this is
practical example from my life.
And I can give more that
might apply to other people.
But I was in a
lot of debt, and I
was partnered with
my mom in a business.
And I just didn't think that
my contribution was worth much.
And I was really attaching to
her brand and her personality.
My mom's Doctor
Christiane Northrup.
And she has an amazing brand
and is such a beautiful person.
I love my mom so much.
And I was really
taking a backseat,
because I just
thought, well she's--
>>LISA: It's all
about her, right?
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, exactly.
And when we dismantled
that business relationship,
because it was no longer serving
either one of us, what happened
is I began to write.
I began to teach workshops
around this work around women
and money.
And I started making
money because I
was adding more value to the
world from the perspective
of first stepping into
I'm actually enough.
>>LISA: Ah, so it makes sense.
>>NORTHRUP: It's a subtle shift,
but it's pretty significant.
And that will happen
in a job, for example,
if you're having an hourly wage
or you're working on a salary
and you want to make more.
If you don't value
yourself first,
you are not going
to be offered the--
>>LISA: Promotion, whatever.
>>NORTHRUP: The promotion.
Thank you for the word.
The promotion or the new gig,
the more responsibilities.
You're not going to be offered
the new job, because you don't
show up in the same
powerful way if you
think you're a piece of crap.
>>LISA: This is true.
No, actually, even if you
are in that hour thing
and there's not a
chance for a promotion,
you can do what you did.
You could create
something that you're
passionate about,
do it on the side
until then you gain
the confidence in that.
>>NORTHRUP: Exactly.
>>LISA: And that is
easier said than done.
>>NORTHRUP: It is absolutely
And it's risky, but if
you're doing it on the side,
it doesn't have
to be that risky.
Like, starting a blog is free.
And learning some
of these things.
You can do such amazing
searches on Google and YouTube
for free information and
build a business from there.
Or build your passion
or do whatever
you want to do-- singing,
songwriting, whatever.
>>LISA: Talk about the internet.
I mean, the internet
itself exponentially
is growing every single year.
And so if starting
online businesses
is a really great way to be
with a very low overhead.
And you just provide
a service to people
who you can find a
niche audience online.
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely.
>>LISA: And that
whole type of thing.
>>NORTHRUP: But it has to start
with you valuing yourself.
Because if you're out there
trying to start a business
and you have this tape
running in your head
that you have
nothing good to offer
and you have
nothing good to say,
you're not going to have the
wherewithal and the get up
and go to move past
the fear, which
is never going to go away.
And actually take the action
that you need to take.
But what's cool is, it kind
of starts to beget itself.
So when you take one loving
action or one self valuing
action, then you're kind
of proving to yourself
that you value yourself.
And then it becomes
easier and easier.
>>LISA: So you say in your
book to value yourself
more than you value money.
Now we're taught
all of our lives
that you need to make money
to live and to eat and to have
a house or shelter.
So we're not taught that.
We're not taught
to value ourselves
and then the money
will follow; we're
taught to make money and
then find self value.
>>NORTHRUP: Right,
and that's backwards.
It's just--
>>LISA: But it's
what is right now.
>>NORTHRUP: It is what is.
But we have to just decide
to do it a different way,
because that's the only
way that things change.
And even though
you can say like,
OK, well this is what it is.
And there are certain
realities in the economy
and certain realities.
But it's like, we
just have to choose
to put our attention in
a different direction.
>>LISA: Right.
>>NORTHRUP: Otherwise, if you
keep buying into that system,
it just keeps
perpetuating itself.
But anyway, with the
self value thing,
it's not necessarily
valuing-- well,
I mean certainly
valuing yourself
more than money is important--
but it's saying, OK,
because money is just
this made up thing.
I mean, it really is.
We made it up a couple
of thousand years ago.
>>LISA: And it was an exchange.
>>NORTHRUP: It used to
be that if you had a cow
and I had a goat,
and I wanted your cow
and you wanted my
goat, we just switched.
>>LISA: Traded.
>>NORTHRUP: We just traded.
Or I had beans or
whatever I had.
And now it's that
you have your cow
and I have some
money that I made
from selling my goat to somebody
else who wanted the goat.
And so it is just a trade
for value for value.
I will say I value this
chunk of cash X amount,
and I value that cow X amount.
And you want this
chunk of cash so you
can go get something else.
And I want the cow.
>>LISA: Have you ever
thought about the fact
that we don't have
cash anymore, though?
That everything is
credit, everything is--
>>NORTHRUP: Plastic.
And it's in computers.
>>LISA: Yeah, and
it's all on paper.
>>NORTHRUP: It's pretty trippy.
>>LISA: Stocks, everything,
are just numbers.
>>NORTHRUP: It all just
exists in the computer.
OK, so some people might
see that as a problem,
or confusing, or whatever.
And sometimes I see
it that way too.
But the opportunity
there is because we
are getting more and
more separated from money
actually being based on
something of substance.
>>LISA: It seems very
intentional, though.
>>NORTHRUP: It really
is almost an opening
for that more spiritual view
of money, where you can say OK,
well the more I value myself.
Like you can just practice it.
Because sometimes it's nice
to talk about something,
but then you have to
prove it to yourself,
because you might think I'm
a complete crazy person.
To value yourself
first and notice
what happens
energetically, people
will start offering
you better gigs.
You will make more money.
And what's cool about
valuing yourself
is, you take better care of the
money you've already earned.
Because in essence, it's
a mirroring, a reflection
of the value you've
given in the world.
So when you value yourself
and you're saying,
yeah, I am worth
this, then you're
going to take that money.
And you're not going to wad
up your bills in your pocket.
And you're not going
to not cash the check
and lose the gift certificate
and not invoice your clients.
Instead, you're going to
really care for that money
as an extension of
caring for yourself.
>>LISA: Let's talk
about some of the issues
that people have around money.
Because you probably could
be like a money psychologist.
You could hear what people
say and you can immediately
tell their issue money, right.
So let's talk about wadding
up money and throwing it
all over the house, and
change and stuff like that.
What's that?
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, so that
is not respecting your money
and not thinking
that-- Oftentimes,
it can be connected
with a belief
that is not spiritual
to have money,
or that somehow money is dirty,
or that people who have money
are greedy or evil.
Those are some of
the thought memes
that have been circulated
through the culture
or from our parents or whatever.
And so when we're not
respecting money--
like when we're just take
the cash and wad it up
or you lose checks.
I used to be somebody
who would lose checks.
I would get a check,
and it was just
like I don't know
where I put it.
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
>>NORTHRUP: And crazy
stuff, you know.
And that is really--
you really need
to dig deeper and say, OK
what is my belief here.
Because my actions--
if you say you
want to make more money,
which most people do.
>>LISA: Right.
>>NORTHRUP: But
then your actions
are like wadding up the
bills and losing checks
and not invoicing
clients-- doesn't line up.
>>LISA: Doesn't connect.
>>NORTHRUP: And so there's a
disconnect between your actions
and what you believe, because
what we believe actually
does create our actions.
And so it's interesting
to just look at, OK,
what did I learn in childhood?
And that's one of
the opportunities
to say, what did my
parents teach me.
Do I even believe those things?
Do I want to take
those things on,
or am I just doing
it unconsciously?
>>LISA: Right, right.
I just remember childhood
memories of my parents
making bad investments.
And it was always--
it was a crisis.
I just remember the conversation
of we lost all that money.
And I noticed myself repeating
that pattern in this lifetime.
But I would love to
know how to break that.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
Well, one of the best things
is to first become aware of it.
>>LISA: I'm aware of it.
>>NORTHRUP: Because,
which is great.
Because physics actually does
prove that when we become aware
of something, our consciousness
or our perception of it
actually does shift that thing.
And so that's in
the physical world.
But we're talking about the
emotional and energetic world.
And I think the
same rules apply.
So becoming aware of it.
And then I have a
girlfriend actually who
she has noticed a
pattern in herself,
that she builds a company
to a certain point.
And then she creates
a total break down,
and everything falls
apart just before it's
going to like really get big, or
what her consideration of big.
And she's noticed she's
done this like five or six
times in her lifetime.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NORTHRUP: But she only
recently noticed the pattern.
And now she's at
that point again.
She built the company
to this place.
And now she's talking about it.
So she has named the pattern.
She's saying, this has been
my pattern in the past.
This is an opportunity
to change it.
I'm taking a different action.
And she has outlined
the new action plan.
And she's holding herself to it.
And she's told her
community so that they
can hold her to it as well.
>>LISA: Oh, nice.
>>NORTHRUP: And
one of the things
is, we don't talk
about money enough.
>>LISA: I was just
going to say that.
>>NORTHRUP: I like
that one mind thing.
>>LISA: Yeah, yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: No.
Money seems to be the dirty
little secret that we don't--
>>LISA: Oh, totally.
>>NORTHRUP: It's such a taboo.
>>LISA: It is.
>>NORTHRUP: So everybody
wants to have more money
and to be having more
sex or better sex.
But we're not allowed to talk
about either of those things.
>>LISA: Oh, no we're not.
>>NORTHRUP: Right.
>>LISA: But it's
what everybody wants.
>>NORTHRUP: It's what everybody
is thinking about all the time.
And those are both
second chakra issues.
So the second chakra is
the reproductive organs,
the low back.
Its money, sex, and power.
So how we interact with
money in our lives,
with sex in our
lives, and with power
are going to have
some things in common.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: And so
I just think, OK,
like do you need to go
up to a random person
and ask them how much they make?
No, it's inappropriate.
That's like a
boundary violation.
>>LISA: It's like how
much sex do you have?
How much money do you have?
>>NORTHRUP: No, it's weird.
Go for it if you want to.
But I'm not like that.
I like to relate to
people in a way that's
more or less
comfortable for them.
>>LISA: Yes.
That's a good plan.
>>NORTHRUP: But some people
love to just shake it up.
I'm not one of those people.
Sitting with your
girlfriends and actually
having a conversation
about hey, do you invest.
Or what do you do for this?
Or do you have a great
financial adviser?
And starting some
sort of a book group.
Reading my book or my friend
Barbara Stanny's books--
"The Secrets of Six Figure
Women," something like that.
Doing that so you're
in the conversation.
Because what we put
our attention on grows.
Right.
>>NORTHRUP: And so starting to
have those conversations can
be really educational.
>>LISA: It's
interesting, because I
like that you direct this topic
specifically towards women.
And it's also very interesting.
A lot of people
picked up on this
as well with your interviews on
the "Today Show" and so forth.
It's not a topic that
we see going together
a lot, women and money.
Because women have not
always been the breadwinners
and the sole earners.
>>NORTHRUP: It's relatively new.
>>LISA: It is.
And it has switched.
I mean, I'm sure you know
the statistics better
than I do about the equal--
>>NORTHRUP: Oh, yeah.
It's like 43% of
households now have
a woman who is making
more money, who's
the primary breadwinner.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>NORTHRUP: Which is a lot.
>>LISA: It is.
>>NORTHRUP: And that
number is probably
only going to increase.
Now it's like I think the
college graduate rate is maybe
60% women and 40% men.
So things are shifting.
But we can't forget
that women only
got the right to vote in 1929.
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>NORTHRUP: That's new.
I can't do the math in my head.
>>LISA: But that's very new.
>>NORTHRUP: That's new.
And so I think we're on that
path, and it's going OK.
>>LISA: Well, it is.
But also, there are women who
have higher positions than men
that are paid less in many
different corporations.
And they are still considered
lower income earners
in corporations.
So there is a long way to go.
>>NORTHRUP: There
is a long way to go.
And it comes back
to valuing yourself.
Because as a woman in the
workplace or negotiating
as even if you're a business
owner, if you take yourself
seriously and you value
yourself and you feel
your inherent worth,
you're not going
to put up with somebody paying
you less than you're worth.
I mean, it's just
going to feel wrong.
And so that's the shift
that we need to make.
Teaching women
assertiveness, absolutely.
And teaching that we are enough.
It really starts there.
>>LISA: It's that
thing where-- take
a lot of people who
are watching the show.
Either a practitioner
or a healer or yoga.
How do those people
perform a service
and then say, pay me for that?
Even if it's a healing or
they're giving of themselves.
And there's a disconnect
between that and money.
>>NORTHRUP: It is.
And in the spiritual and
healing world in particular,
there's this disconnect.
But we've all probably-- if
you're hanging in the spiritual
community a little bit, or
the wellness community--
we've probably heard the analogy
that we cannot give of an empty
cup.
And so if you're not filling
your own reserves first
emotionally, energetically,
and financially, you're
not going to be able
to keep showing up
to give that service.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's true.
>>NORTHRUP: Right.
It's like a well.
The pregnancy metaphor is
a really good one here.
If a woman is not
well nutriented,
if she's not getting
good sleep, if she's not
eating her fruits and veggies
and getting her omega 3s,
her baby is not
going to be healthy.
And she's going to suffer
from postpartum depression
and other things afterwards,
because the baby's going
to take all the nutrients.
>>LISA: That's a great analogy.
Absolutely.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
And it's the same thing
financially for a practitioner.
If you're a healer,
healer heal thyself.
Right.
You've got to do it.
You've got to do it so if
you have to tell yourself
that you need to do that just
so you can keep showing up
for other people, that's
a fine place to start.
>>LISA: You are wise
beyond your years.
I mean, you look like you're 14.
And you're having all this
great wisdom around money.
>>NORTHRUP: That's funny.
>>LISA: Well, I'm not
going the only one
that took the attention of that.
Also--
>>NORTHRUP: I'm 19.
>>LISA: Take a look at
Kate on the "Today Show."
Take a look.
>>ANCHOR: This morning
on "Today's Money,"
whether your financially
secure or deep in debt,
money always a big
source of stress.
>>AL ROKER: It
doesn't have to be,
especially if you
pay attention to how
you feel every time you spend.
Kate Northrup is the author
of a new book, "Money:
A Love Story."
Kate, good to see you.
>>ANCHOR: Hey Kate.
>>NORTHRUP: Good to see you, hi.
>>ROKER: So your
book is about, really
when it comes down to it,
gaining financial freedom.
>>NORTHRUP: It really is, yeah,
emotionally and practically.
And so financial
freedom is really
having your passive
income greater
than your living expenses.
And also just feeling
good about your money,
because we have to deal
with money every day.
And so why not have a
good relationship with it?
>>ANCHOR: And you know
of what you write.
You were at one point
were 20,000 bucks in debt.
Is that right?
>>LISA: I was.
>>ANCHOR: How did
you dig your way out?
>>NORTHRUP: I did it
through getting really
real about my living
expenses and my income
and proceeding to add
more value to the world
in order to increase
my income, which
is the best way to
increase your income.
Because money is really just
a stand in for what we value.
So if we add value to
more people's lives,
our income will increase.
>>ROKER: And sometimes,
you know, people
feel badly about spending.
And you have three tips.
And I love this first one.
It says spend money on
what you truly value,
not on what you think
you should have.
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely.
You'll get more emotional
bang for your buck
if you spend money
on what you value,
which requires identifying
what you value.
So maybe your values
are community, health,
and adventure.
And if you look at your
spending and orient it
in alignment with
those things, you'll
actually feel really good
about your spending as opposed
to spending on things that
you think your mom wants you
to have or keeping
up with the Joneses.
>>ROKER: And you spend
less in the process.
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely.
That's the idea.
Because if you're
spending with your values,
then you can spend
less and still
feel really good about it.
>>ANCHOR: I can hear
people watching this
though say, emotional
value is great,
but I've got to pay
my rent this month.
So how does the emotional value
connect to making more money?
>>NORTHRUP: Great question.
So your emotional value
is really important,
because being grateful
for the fact that you
can pay your rent, I
mean that's a value.
Being able to pay
for a living expenses
and have a roof over your head.
And so getting tied into I'm
grateful that I can actually
write that check to my
landlord, and thank you
for the electricity that I can
flip on a switch every day.
>>ROKER: You also talk about
having a savings account,
but a money for me account.
>>NORTHRUP: Yes.
So when it comes to
spending less money,
it often feels like deprivation.
But instead, if you create
a money for me account, what
you can do is every
time you save money
and you decide not
to spend the money,
you can put it in your
money for me account.
Or when you negotiate for a
lower rate on your credit card
or when you get
unexpected income,
you get to pay yourself.
So you're sort of
rewiring yourself to say,
this money is for me.
I'm paying myself
instead of Nordstrom
or whomever else might have
gotten the money in the past.
>>ANCHOR: Now is
that OK in a marriage
to have that little side
account for yourself?
>>NORTHRUP: You know, I
think you can name it a money
for us account if
you're in a marriage.
Yeah.
>>ANCHOR: OK.
All right.
>>ROKER: Just go ahead
and go with money for me.
>>ANCHOR: So don't
keep a phantom account.
I'm asking for a
friend, obviously.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, obviously.
>>ROKER: Uh-oh.
>>ANCHOR: Christina's
not watching.
She's with the kids, hopefully.
Listen to your body when it
comes to your spending habits.
What does that mean?
>>NORTHRUP: This
is one you're not
going to find in other
personal finance books.
What is it is our body is--
you know how you get that gut
feeling, like it'll
get tense and tight?
When you look back at your
past spending decisions,
go through your
credit card bill,
feel into each
expenditure and feel
whether your body felt expansive
when you spent that money
or contracted.
And then when you look at
your money in the coming times
when you're going
to spend money,
check in for that
as well and you'll
be able to make smarter
spending decisions.
>>ANCHOR: Different ways
to think about money.
Kate Northrup, thanks so much.
>>NORTHRUP: Thank you.
>>LISA: So I
mentioned in the intro
that our relationship with
money has to do with love.
I got that from you.
What does money and love
have to do with each other?
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
So money and love have
to do with each other,
because we create a better
relationship with our money
through creating a better
relationship with ourself,
which starts with love.
I mean--
>>LISA: Self love you mean?
>>NORTHRUP: Self love.
The solution to pretty much any
problem you have is self love.
Which is kind of annoying,
because when people
say like love yourself more,
I have to say every time,
even though I'm in
this world and I
say that, I think to myself,
yeah, but what does that mean.
>>LISA: Right, well--
>>NORTHRUP: What does
that actually mean?
>>LISA: I came up
with a new philosophy.
I was looking at Wayne Dyer
lecture the other night.
And he has L-O-V-E on his shirt.
And I just started to reverse
it as dyslexia goes with me.
And it's evolve.
It's the beginning
of the word evolve.
E-V-O-L, and you just put
a V-E at the end of that.
And as we learn to
love ourselves more,
we are learning we
are actually evolving.
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely.
>>LISA: As ourselves.
And being able to model that.
One of the biggest questions
I get from people is, well,
how do I pass a good money
relationship down to my kids?
What do I tell them?
And what I always say is, clean
up your side of the sidewalk.
Heal it within
yourself and model it.
Because I'm not a parent
yet, but I know as a child
and watching children.
I'm not a child
anymore, but when I was.
>>LISA: OK, sure.
>>NORTHRUP: That the
modeling of the behavior
is the strongest force that
we pick up from our parents,
is we see their behavior.
We feel how it made them feel.
And then we continue the legacy.
>>LISA: It's a double
edged sword there, sweetie.
Because I have a daughter.
And I have sometimes a hard
time with going to work
instead of going
to her soccer game.
And I wonder if I'm
sending that message to her
that money is more
important than her.
>>NORTHRUP: Well,
or-- I don't know.
>>LISA: Please, please.
>>NORTHRUP: But
another option that you
might be sending to her is
that having a mother being
a woman who's passionate
about her work
and giving back to the
world is really important.
And so it might inspire
in her-- I grew up
with a mom who was incredibly
passionate about her work,
traveled a lot, left
home quite a bit.
And I have to say,
it was hard as a kid,
but ultimately it's given me
permission to follow my dreams.
And I can't think of
any better role model
than to have a woman who, yeah,
sometimes she wasn't around.
But she also, when she
was home, she really was--
>>LISA: Present.
>>NORTHRUP: There.
And then I get this
permission to say, you know,
there's my mom
following her dreams.
>>LISA: Did you really
take that essence away?
>>NORTHRUP: Like later, I did.
>>LISA: That's great.
>>NORTHRUP: Probably, in
high school, I would say.
In high school, I kind
of started to get it.
>>LISA: You had better
decision making abilities then.
>>NORTHRUP: I think
that she also,
as an entrepreneur and a
woman charting her own course,
showed me the example
of there aren't
rules of how you have to do it.
You don't have to
follow the party line.
And like feel free to veer off
any time and do your own thing.
And so I am sure that's
what your passing along
to your daughter.
>>LISA: I'm hoping so.
OK, so can we get some
advice on a budget?
>>NORTHRUP: Oh, yeah.
So I don't really like
the word budgeting.
>>LISA: OK.
>>NORTHRUP: I think of
budgeting sort of like dieting.
Any time you start
something-- So budget to me
has a connotation with
restriction and deprivation.
Instead, I like to use
the term spending plan.
Because for me, it
feels expansive,
and budget feels
like shut it down.
And it feels not fun at all.
And so spending plan to
me-- organizing our lives
around what we value
is really important.
So money is a stand
in for what we value.
And if we want to get
on track financially,
a really good place to start
is spending money on the things
we actually value, not on the
things we think we should have
or that our mother
told us we should have
or that society
thinks or whatever.
>>LISA: So wait.
How do you explain shoes
as something we value?
Because women and
shoes, it's a thing.
Every woman knows it.
We have more shoes
than we have feet.
>>NORTHRUP: I think
you have to really ask
yourself, what are the
shoes feeding in me?
I really, I'm serious right now.
This sounds so frivolous
But the reality
is like, some people
have a value of beauty.
Or some people really
want to feel sexy.
And like sexiness and
sensuality is a value of theirs.
And perhaps the shoes are
meeting that particular value.
So it's not shoes.
You don't value shoes.
There's always something
deeper behind your behavior
underneath.
And so starting to
ask yourself, why am I
spending the money on
this instead of this
is a really powerful question
instead of beating yourself up.
Because what the personal
finance industry does is make
us feel bad about our choices.
And it's very much
like, it can be.
There are some wonderful people.
I love my CPA, for
example But there
can be some finger wagging
and some you've been bad
and you've been wrong
and what's wrong with you
for not taking advantage of
compound interest, for example.
>>LISA: I mean, I think
about the-- I don't
know where I heard this--
but the latte diet.
If you take out one latte
a week or two lattes a week
or whatever, then you'll have
enough money to invest, right.
>>NORTHRUP: That's
a fabulous idea.
However, that doesn't take
into account our values.
I will tell you something,
the amount of emotional bang
I get for my buck when
I buy a latte is huge,
far more than if I
spent like 100 times
more on-- let me
think about something
I don't really care about--
like a monster truck show.
>>LISA: Right, right, right.
>>NORTHRUP: That's
a bad example.
But like I'm not really
into cars, for example.
It just doesn't do it for me.
I'm really into travel.
I'm really into spending
time with friends and kind
of spiritual experiences
and connections.
So I think the latte
factor is great,
but you need to look at
the thing in your life.
>>LISA: In your life.
>>NORTHRUP: That's
like the latte.
That really, it's like,
at the end of the day,
it doesn't actually give you
that much joy and pleasure.
But for me, the
latte actually does.
And the reality is, so
much financial advice
is about postponement of joy
and postponement of pleasure.
And while I do think
it's really important
to save for retirement
and I do that.
I recommend it.
There's this idea
that like we're
supposed to slave away and
suffer and deprive ourselves
until we're 65 and
then we can live.
>>LISA: I know.
>>NORTHRUP: What's up with that?
But you know, the beautiful
thing about the internet
is that it allows
people to continue
in-- not the workforce--
but providing their passions
even after that.
>>NORTHRUP: Which is so cool.
I mean, both of my parents are
not anywhere near slowing down.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: And same
with my grandmother's 88.
And she built a business,
and exercises every day
and is such a great example
of just like keeping on.
>>LISA: There's so
many more new things
to learn every single day.
>>NORTHRUP: I know.
>>LISA: OK, so I
wanted to get back
to the conversation around debt.
I just want to make sure
that I heard you correctly,
that you're not saying debt
is something that is frivolous
because it's just a number.
You're saying that it's
something that's real.
>>NORTHRUP: Debt is real.
>>LISA: But we can get
over our heads, I mean,
completely over our heads and
lose things like homes and--
>>NORTHRUP: Absolutely.
No, it's real.
>>LISA: Businesses.
>>NORTHRUP: It's scary.
It's scary to the extent that
we're not conscious about it.
So what ends up happening is
we do all these behaviors.
And in my own life,
it was like I bought--
and the irony of this
is not lost on me--
but a lot of my debt was
personal growth seminars.
And so--
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>NORTHRUP: I had
this-- I was kind
of feeding an
emotional hole in me
that felt like I wasn't good
enough and that felt like, well
if I just go to
this weekend thing
or if I just sign up
for this $3,000 course,
then they have an answer that
I'm going to need to fix me.
And so what we can do, if
you're in a lot of debt
and it feels suffocating--
which absolutely it
can feel super suffocating.
And that's real.
I'm not saying, oh
it doesn't matter.
And just, you know.
>>LISA: Don't creditors
come after you
when you have collections?
>>NORTHRUP: And people--
they lose their homes.
They can lose their whole lives.
But what's really
important is to look
at what am I feeding here?
Like what is going on
underneath the surface?
And for me, I was feeding
my desire to look perfect
and to look like I had it
completely all together.
And so I did all sorts
of things feeding that.
And then I realized, nobody
knows what they're doing
and nobody has it all together.
So if I can just let that
go, things began to change.
And I stopped spending
money on things
that were trying to fill
a void that was never
going to be filled
by stuff or courses.
>>LISA: That is a
great way of saying it.
Yes, we don't really
need all that stuff.
>>NORTHRUP: No.
And in 2010, I
decided I was going
to move out of New York
City, sell all my stuff,
and go on a road
trip indefinitely.
And so I bought a Prius and
I got rid of all my stuff.
And all my stuff was just
in the back of the Prius.
And I have really
never felt more free
than having so little
needs financially that way.
>>LISA: That's neat.
>>NORTHRUP: But so
expansive and so abundant
in a lot of different ways.
>>LISA: Oh, yeah.
That is really neat.
And how long did you go
on the road trip for?
>>NORTHRUP: It was 10 months.
>>LISA: Wow.
And where'd you journey to?
>>NORTHRUP: All over.
It was all over North America.
So I did 34,000
miles, 41 states,
and a couple provinces
thrown in there.
>>LISA: Wow.
And what'd you learn?
What'd you gain?
>>NORTHRUP: Oh my gosh.
It's a big thing.
But I fell in love with my
fiance, which was really fun.
I invited him on a whim to
come with me and he said yes.
But only it was supposed
to be for five days.
But that ended up
being 10 months.
I learned about the freedom
of simplicity and really what
tuning into what
we actually-- OK,
so we spend money because
we want to feel secure or--
>>LISA: Fill a void.
>>NORTHRUP: Fill a void.
Or we-- whatever.
It's always connected with an
emotional desire that we have.
And so what I found is that
if we can meet those emotional
needs other places,
then we can just
use money for what
it's actually for,
which is creating opportunities,
creating choices in our life,
maybe creating some experiences.
>>LISA: Providing
for other people.
>>NORTHRUP: Providing,
security, being
generous, all of those things.
But stop using it for the
stuff that it's not really for.
>>LISA: You hit a
big never there.
There's a whole emotional
shopping component.
>>NORTHRUP: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: And it's an addiction.
And it fills a void.
And it doesn't really
filling the void, actually.
So it's a full addiction.
>>NORTHRUP: It can
be a full addiction.
And there actually is-- I
mean, if somebody's listening
and they feel like,
ooh, that might be me.
There actually are
12 step programs,
which are phenomenal and free.
>>LISA: All right, we're going
to take a look at Kate's video
on her book, "Money:
A Love Story."
>>NORTHRUP: Hi,
I'm Kate Northrup,
and I have a new book coming out
called "Money: A Love Story."
In the book, you're going to get
practical strategies to get out
of debt faster than you
ever thought possible,
to reorganize your life so
you feel abundant every day
no matter what so that
you can spend your most
precious asset, which
is actually your time,
doing exactly the
things that you want
to do so that your
life is exactly the way
you want it to be.
I've designed a bunch
of great exercises
in the book to take you
through the process of not
only the theoretical aspect
of all this money stuff,
but really the practical
stuff so you can take it home.
Some of my favorites
are setting up a Money
for Me Account, which
is going to teach you
how to decrease your
spending in a way that
feels really luxurious
and abundant.
Another one of my favorites
is the Feeling Good Financial
Planning Process, which
is going to teach you
how to align your whole
financial life with what
feels good to you
as opposed to you
trying to fit into statistics.
The thing about money
is that none of us
are going to be able to go
through life without dealing
with it.
So we might as well make the
whole thing a loving process.
I know this personally
because I got
into and out of $20,000
worth of credit card debt
using the exact
strategies that I'm
going to teach you in the book.
I'm so excited for
you to get this book
and for you to create
your own money love story.
>>LISA: Two things that
we most likely did not
learn from our parents is
telling the truth around money.
How many people have
I spoken to that
go back to that moment
where there was secrecy,
it was never talked
about at the dinner table
if there was a dinner table.
And it was we have
more than we say,
or we have less than we say.
What is that truth
around money thing?
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, it's weird.
It is this cultural
assumption that it's not
OK to talk about
it, and that is what
happens around dinner
tables across America,
I'm sure across the world.
>>LISA: It came out
of the Depression.
Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, absolutely.
And just this whole idea
it's not OK for other people
to know how much we make.
Our kids shouldn't know.
I mean, just like strange.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: Because
everybody's dealing
with money on a daily basis.
And so one of the
most powerful things
we can do to just
change that legacy
is to tell ourselves the
truth starting out with that.
And when I was in a lot
of debt, I literally
had no idea how much it was.
And I didn't look.
I didn't look.
I was so scared because I
had so much self judgment
that I just didn't even look.
And I kind of just
treaded water with my nose
barely above the surface.
So when I got some
support around this,
because I realized
I have been saying
I want to change this
behavior for a while now
and I'm not actually
changing the behavior.
So I knew I needed help.
So I got a financial
advisor on the phone with me
who is really loving
and super helpful.
And she just asked me
a series of questions.
OK, so how much do you spend
and how much do you make
and what's this account and
what's happening over here.
And with her holding my
hand and not judging me,
I wrote everything out.
And I had been so
terrified to do that,
but what ended up
happening is just
knowing the truth
felt so freeing.
>>LISA: How?
>>NORTHRUP: It felt
so much more freeing
than being in the gray zone
and being in avoidance, which
was like this constant like--
you know those little no-- we
call them no-see-ums in Maine.
I don't know what you call them.
But they're like
tiny little bugs.
And they make this
noise like eee.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
So having money stuff that
you're not dealing with
is like a constant little
no-see-um in your ear
that's like eee.
And it's really annoying.
And it makes you less able to be
present with the things you're
actually doing-- with your
kids, with your career,
with those things.
And so if you actually
tell yourself the truth,
I found I was like, oh.
Well now I know where I am.
And I know where I want to go.
And if I know where I am
and where I want to go,
I can actually get there.
Because beforehand, it
was just total gray zone.
>>LISA: So you
need a plan though,
but you can accept
the plan easier
after you've gotten
to a place of truth.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah.
>>LISA: OK.
>>NORTHRUP: And telling
the truth about something
we feel shame around is
one of the quickest ways
to lighten that shame and
bring it out into light.
And nine times out
of ten, when you
tell yourself the
truth and then when
you tell somebody safe
who's going to love you,
it's way less worse than you
thought it was going to be.
>>LISA: That's very true.
It's actually very freeing.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, so freeing.
>>LISA: OK, so the other thing
is this conversation that money
is a laborious, deep,
stressful conversation.
How do we make it fun if we know
there's lots of debt happening
and nothing coming in?
>>NORTHRUP: So there are so
many different ways to make
dealing with your money
fun and pleasurable.
And that's one of the main ways
that I got myself out of debt.
Because I felt like the
whole finance conversation
was really heavy.
>>LISA: A burden.
>>NORTHRUP: And it felt
complicated, honestly.
And it felt depressing.
And it felt like deprivation
and beating myself up.
And I just-- it felt icky.
So I didn't do it.
But the thing is, if
something's fun, you'll do it.
And so I just needed to
rewire the whole experience.
So one thing I did is I
renamed bills Invoices
for Blessings Already Received.
So it became-- paying my bills
became a practice in gratitude,
because it was like,
oh, how awesome.
I get to pay Time Warner
Cable for the fact
that I have wireless internet
at my apartment 24 hours a day
and I can connect to
the entire planet.
I am super grateful for that.
And guess what-- we all signed
up for the bills that we have.
Like, we swiped our credit
card and we opted in.
And so practicing
gratitude around that
is one way to make
it feel way better.
Having a financial
freedom date or whatever
you want to call
it, you can call it
a money date, where you get
together with your spouse
or on your own and create some
accoutrements around that.
So actually maybe have a
delicious beverage in a wine
glass, play some
great music, have
flowers, put on cute
underwear, red lipstick,
whatever it takes.
And make it fun.
And one thing that
I thought was really
genius somebody
I worked with did
is she had her spending plan and
her spreadsheet where she would
track all her
numbers each month.
And she renamed every
category for the goddess
that rules that category.
So instead of putting
her home expenses down,
she called that
category Vesta, who
is the goddess of
home and the hearth.
>>LISA: Oh, interesting.
>>NORTHRUP: And so she created
this whole spiritual practice
around tracking her numbers so
she felt like she was communing
with the goddess instead
of doing a spreadsheet.
>>LISA: How much is Athena
spending on underwear?
How much is--
>>NORTHRUP: How fun is that?
>>LISA: How much is Aphrodite
spending at Victoria's Secret?
>>NORTHRUP: Exactly.
>>LISA: And then
we can do these--
>>NORTHRUP: And then it
becomes this whole other things
where it doesn't
have to be drudgery.
But honestly, it can be as
simple as playing a great song
while you track your receipts.
>>LISA: Right, right.
It can put you into
an altered state.
>>NORTHRUP: Exactly.
>>LISA: And make you
a happier person.
>>NORTHRUP: Yeah, because how
you do it is what you get.
The more fun you
have doing something,
the more it kind of opens
the passageway for abundance
to flow.
Money is a stand in
for what we value.
>>LISA: A stand in
I get that now.
>>NORTHRUP: Cool.
>>LISA: Very good.
Thank you so much.
>>NORTHRUP: Thank you.
This was a pleasure.
>>LISA: Fun.
You're a lot of fun, too.
And I love how the energy that
you lighten up around money.
It's the new
generation of money.
Thank you so much.
Kate Northrup here.
If you'd like to watch my
interview with Kate Northrup
or play it for your friends,
you can go to gaiamtv.com.
And until then, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]